Hi.
It's welcome,
Ah, afternoon to see you Su Welcome to the,
uh, primary Production Select committee.
Um, we, uh, obviously going over the petition
around the Madagascar Rad War,
and we'll leave it in your hands to, um, run that
as you please.
You've got, uh, how many minutes? 20 minutes each?
20 minutes each of each submitter.
These mice, you have to push up
to talking to them, or they just read?
No. Okay. The, the, if you push them, they go off. Okay.
So, good afternoon. My name's Ian Cer.
Um, I live up in Tcho Bay in Northland,
and I, I run a small
70 hectare beef farm up there.
Uh, so a bit of history on the Madagascar.
So I, I, about six years ago, 2019, I first
noticed it in the paddocks around the farm
and just dismissed it as a, a, a common weed, a yellow weed.
And it wasn't until two years later, 21 that, um,
big infestations started appearing in the fields.
Fortunately, a friend
of mine who's an ecologist was visiting
and I said, what do you think of this weed?
And came out and looked at it, took it away,
and identified it as Madagascar rag work,
and then came back and said, actually,
you've got a problem here.
This stuff spreads like wildfire. Are you aware of Pao?
In further north, we've got really serious infestations
of Madagascar rag work.
About the same time, north Regional Council held a workshop,
which I attended at, on Madagascar rag work.
And that was really just a, um,
a fact finding mission on their behalf
because they have no, at that stage,
and I think even now, they have a silver bullet
for farmers on how to deal with it.
So the, the way I've dealt with it is to, uh, hand weed it,
get some backpackers in, and some big bags and walk around
and pull it all out and then dispose of it, uh, correctly.
Um, I've tried spraying, um,
but the problem with spraying is
that you, you only kill the plant.
You don't kill the seed.
So I've come back the next year and it's still there.
And the problem is that one plant will produce 10, 20,000
seeds, which will, will germinate for the next 10 years.
So there's, there's no silver bullet at the moment on
how, how to get rid of it.
And the problem then is if you, if you spray it,
you are then impacting the pasture quality that you have.
So your, your global will go
and any, any other herbal, um, lays
that you've got in on the farm,
let alone the financial cost of it.
Now, with that, I, uh, ask the, um, committee
to give you all the photo, um,
should be one on your thing there.
Mm-hmm. So that the one with the sheep in it, is that there?
Yeah, that's fine. Okay.
So that was taken earlier this week at a local farm,
and as you can see, the, the sheep are, um, struggling
to get around the, the, the infestation of rag work
to find some grass.
So that's how bad it can, it can get. And of course it has.
Um, it's not healthy for sheep, horses or cattle,
and I think Jeff or Dr,
or Palmer will certainly tell you about some of the studies
that they've done on that.
I've also, uh, attached some impact statements
from some farmers.
And what came back from me reading those was that the
anxiety and mental stress that this is causing on them,
that they, it's yet another weed
that they're having to deal with.
They see little progress coming from Northern Regional
Council and are frustrated
that there's been limited progress.
So the petition is really to cover,
let's get an awareness program started.
It's been too long. There's, um, because
because the plant itself has got, is capable
of going all the way to Canterbury
and farmers need to be aware of what's coming their way.
I've also asked if there could be some,
a lot more research on the biological, um,
control and also herbicide control,
so we start getting some actions.
So I've said a bit. Any questions?
Yeah, I, I'll, I'll start if you don't mind. Um,
How many times does it flower a year?
Do? Is it flowering all the time or is it flowering
Time? It's flowering
at the moment, and then it'll flower
at least two more times in the
What, um, Ian, um, just a couple questions.
Uh, top, is that a partial option at all? And
Sorry, say that again? Topping,
is that a, is the, is that a partial
Option? Well,
the problem is you get rid of the seed Yeah. And
It's a palable when it's young and growing. Like
I haven't, I haven't I seen that.
Yes. It makes it more palatable
for cattle and that's the problem.
Yep. They'll get sick on it. Yeah. Okay.
Uh, um, and a few other questions.
Um, are there any other potential chemicals
that you don't have access to, like in other jurisdictions
that could help control it?
Not, not to my knowledge. Uh, I know I
Think you've said like I I, I've dealt with this lead
as a chemical applicator at currently the,
the strongest chemical you can use is, is, uh,
brush killer, torn on brush killer.
Yeah. Okay. Uh, chemical resistance is a problem. Yeah.
The other option would be net sulfur.
Once you get to those two chemicals, um, you know,
you've got resistance chemical and there's no other tool
and ing.
Yeah. Okay. So, and it's costly.
Costly, uh, pardon me, will be speaking next about costs.
Yeah. I mean, I, for me it's about $200 a hectare
short, but if, um, if you're in hill country's
Not Country that's not on hill country.
Yeah. So that's just going out with a boom sprayer and, and,
and spraying, but you won't get it.
You come back the next year and,
and Pao who's property, uh, is adjacent to mine,
they sprayed all their, um, Madagascar out last year.
It's all come back and our other neighbor
to the north is Carrie Cliffs,
and they had a helicopter $20,000 to spray it
and it's all come back again. Joe's got a question,
Just a, um, 'cause Mike pretty much asked the question
that I wanted to ask, but,
and I didn't quite hear the end of it, mark,
but did you, Mike, did you ask, um, about,
about not having access to chemicals here,
but what about overseas?
What they use is, did you ask that there's any jurisdiction?
If there's anything overseas that they use?
Um, that could be something that
though our process is very long here to try
and get new chemicals in.
But if there was something, is there something
that you're aware of overseas?
Not, not to my knowledge,
No. I'm not aware of any
other, you know, so how are
They dealing with it overseas?
Well, we're not really sure. Okay.
We hope to invest, like it's come from Madagascar
blowing right across Australia.
Yeah. Blowing into the top of the north island, spread
through the forestry and then into the family.
Okay. So blew they must, it's blown the, do the seeds,
uh, travel on animals or through animals as well?
Or
We've seen evidence of that maybe in stuck in hooves
and, and the hair follicles.
I mean, I heard another story, I'm not disputing
what you said, Jeff, but, um,
that some agricultural equipment came from Australia
20 plus years ago.
Uh, and it got through bio security, it went up
to the far north and it slowly heading south.
And the last confirmed report,
it's about 20 K south of Kerry Kerry.
But Jeff was saying today that an experience, um,
we controller has found it.
Yeah. Just, just king case North. Oh, no. Uh, uh, LAN.
Yeah. Thank you. Um, thank you for bringing this
to our attention as well.
Like I, my background is on regional council
and I know frustrating these processes can be
in trying to get actual
Action. Yep.
Can you, you, you mentioned
that Northland Regional Council has been really slow,
but I think there was something in the briefing materials
about them considering putting it in their next, uh,
regional pest management plan or something.
Can you give us a bit of a flavor of what,
what they are actually doing, if anything,
just to kind of help you
Are probably Well, that's what,
that's how we have to deal with it.
We have to put it in insurer.
Um, we are just updating our
regional pest scan from plan at the moment
that is actually in it.
Um, we've had Andrew Ger up on site at,
at a ade um, visit.
Um, our biggest concern is, I, I did ask Andrew maybe, uh,
to look at a can option in our area,
which controlled area notice, um,
to make an awareness program.
Mm-hmm. Because with the logging operations
that we have in the far north, you know,
anybody can put a digger on a, uh, on the transporter
and send it straight down to Suzie Redmond's place
and do her logging down there.
That's the three. You do not know where they've come from
and you can get it on your farm any day to the mm-hmm.
There's no awareness of this problem. Mm-hmm.
You know, and that is our biggest concern is that, um,
but will, I don't wanna steal their thunder, you know,
the awareness is somewhat of the big issue.
You've only just heard about it, Susie,
you're a farmer, you're unaware of it.
You do not want it on your property.
Same soil type that just loves that sandy open soil.
It'll spread like wildfire
and they call it wildfire in Australia.
Fire fire. We actually, yeah.
Just going on from what Jeff was saying about awareness,
um, a part of the petition, I went
to the kaiko e sale yards run by Wrightsons, uh, to,
to make farmers more aware
and get some signatures to get the petition going.
And each time I went there, I'd speak to about 50 farmers.
Only three or four had any knowledge at all about it.
And it's when you showed it to them.
Oh, yeah, I've seen that. So it's,
it's a big problem in the awareness or lack of,
Um, has there been any thinking, what is the risk?
Um, I know it had been, uh, uh, perhaps not
so much feed that comes up comes from Northland,
but if we've got extreme weather events that happen
and when farmers lose feed
or don't have access to be able to put their stock
on pasture, and we get farmers from around the country
that donate feed feed, how big is the risk?
Is there much that comes from out of Northland
or would come outta Northland
and that based Good question around,
around the country not detected in other places.
Maybe how big is the risk here and and what do you think we
Might, well, at the moment where Northland's experiencing
a lot of high grass growth rates.
Yeah. If you get a dra drought in the Y catto,
then there will be a pull of Yeah.
Feed, feed from the north.
So it could be carried in bailage or hay.
And then does the, sorry,
does the silent process not kill the seed?
I, I, I, I can't say that
Categorically, But
I don't think so. What I've
seen, like we, we've had
varied thistles come up from the wato in Bailage.
You can see where it's been dropped off the truck
and there's a circle of it.
I, I'm not a scientific trial on this,
but in the far north, uh,
our seasons are a lot earlier than anywhere else.
Horse feed is growing that, that nice little bailed hay.
Yeah. You know, you can just visualize it
feeds straight into the Waikato.
Um, that a lot of that comes from the far north.
Um, there's a lot of potential.
So is NPI
or the minister giving any indication
that they might put some kind of, uh, notification
to halt any sort of feed being shared amongst the areas? If
There's that that was need feed that was suggested
to NPI Yeah.
And Northern Regional Council that I've
Had no response. Right.
Yeah. Lo to do it, we asked for it,
but yeah, like a can controlled area notice
to make an awareness program around this.
Okay. There are always resistance
of bringing in stuff, right?
Yeah. It has to be a serious,
but it's gotta be in our pest, it's gotta be in our weed.
It's about being reactive, about being,
We had to put it in our, into our, um,
regional pest management plan first, which we're doing.
It's gotta be in there before we can actually get a a.
Okay. Nice. Mike,
Sorry, just on that though.
Sorry. But was there something that said
that's not till 2027?
Yes. And that's the problem, right? So can you not Yeah,
Like, Sorry, I'll go. I
Was just gonna say hi. I hope
Andrew, I got clean his gum boots
before he went back to the rank
Of ticket sort Socks.
So we put the hose on them. Yeah.
Um, just a couple questions.
Um, um, that,
do you got any data on the germination rate of the seat?
You know, like nodding SLES and 90% Scotties or about 40%?
Any, any idea on that and how there's
A, there's a good document from Ag research,
which I haven't got with me,
but that's, that it is, it's, it's not a dictionary,
but it's quite clear about that data.
So that's probably a good go-to reference point.
Can Share The scientific,
we can share that too.
Yeah. Can send it to you. I
Think, how far are these seeds actually
blowing off a plant?
You know, ator is very heavy.
Doesn't treble far. What about off east?
Uh, that's in the report,
but I think Palm might have a bit more data on that.
Yep. Okay. 'cause they'd been monitoring it like
the roadside are the problem.
Yeah, yeah. Right. Things like that.
You don't think about this sort of stuff
and as, as I've seen in the far north, you know,
we've been spraying our roads for the last 30 years,
gly eight and net sulfur.
Yeah. You'll actually see weeds that don't die. Yeah. Yeah.
So there's a whole issue about, you know,
around this is a bigger, bigger issue.
So,
Um, how does it differ from the standard rag walk
that we've been talking about for years?
Uh, it shouldn't be called a rag walk. The other one.
Yeah. Yeah. Right. Yeah. It's a completely different plant.
It's actually we, that's why we call it mad rag
because people's eyes. Oh, so
You are what the new one shouldn't be called rag wood?
No, the new one should be, oh, the new
One should be, but the old one one that we treat now
that we've had in the past, yes, we've had issues
with it in the past, but that's, is it not as invasive
or not as completely d easy to
Manage it completely, completely different.
So you can, okay. Yeah. Yeah.
And, and we've got buyer control for that as well. Yeah.
You know, and it used to be a problem 30 years ago. Yeah.
Used to see up all the valleys.
Now you're driving around and
That, and that's part of the problem.
Oh, that's what I'm saying. 'cause
it's definitely controllable. Yeah.
Yeah. That's why we didn't wanna take the rag walk out out
because people visualize that makes,
because that's not gonna be a problem.
Yeah. It's,
I was gonna say, given our track hor, um, in the past,
you know, we haven't been very good at, um, retaining,
you know, knot thistles and Hawkes barn.
They've just quietly spread south
and, you know, nodding thistles and mid Canterbury and north
and south and go and Broome
and all around the country, you know,
what would you wilding, like wilding, what would you,
in a perfect world like to see done and try
and re number one, restrict the spread of it
Jefferson, make sure that the logging trucks
clean their diggers and their trucks.
Um, look at, uh, restricting the,
the feed supply going south.
Um, the awareness program, obviously get
that out as soon as possible.
Attend the field days, get rights
and um, farm source, um, farmlands
to put out some posters there.
You know, e even at the local nurseries
because it's, it's not just farmers.
It'll also be in people's back gardens.
You know, I was at the Oke airport last year
and they've got a war garden
and it was growing up there at the airport
And, and like awareness, something sort of akin
to the Didymo type.
Yeah, definitely program. Definitely. Yeah.
So back in the day, um,
you had obnoxious weed inspector on your district councils
or whatever, and, and they had quite reasonable powers to,
uh, make people, uh, act on weeds, noxious weeds.
Are those powers available
to councils in the same way nowadays?
Because it would seem to me that, um, even, you know,
down our way where there's go
or you know, these identified weeds on the land,
um, there's no compelling landowners to deal with them.
No, this is an issue.
There are rules around that,
but it that it's whether they're policed, you know what,
what we've put our new plan is, uh, with Madagascar, uh,
mad rack is to make it a 50 meter buffer zone instead
of only 10 to extend it out that we have, we will be more,
once we get it into our regional pest management plan,
there will be some rigorous around this.
Like, like neighbors will be able to ring up like Ian
and say, my neighbor has got it right up to his fence line.
Then there'd be a notice and then there'd be fine
and then we'll have their employee somebody
to do it if you don't wanna do it.
But that's, that's the the worst case scenario.
Yes. But you're going to need those enforcement Yeah.
Powers, um, powers and,
and people actively managing those
enforcement powers I suppose. So. Um,
Is it on, have you got any cases of it on Dockland?
Uh, well command Swamp up there hasn't, it's a huge area.
Um, yeah, it's Right. 3D
It's on Dock. Yeah,
it's on Dockland. It's through the Forest Dockland.
Yeah.
Okay. Mike, any um, any indications of potential, um,
uh, bio controls?
You know, like a little bug or a fungus
or talk about that a little bit?
Original councils, um, put $40,000 into the Australian
model 'cause they've been working
on this for quite some time.
And that, and that's our best avenue. Uh, at this moment.
They haven't, we've had no results from them.
Uh, and not only that, that's only one stage.
And then if they do find something,
we've gotta make sure whether
we can get it into New Zealand.
Yeah, yeah. You know, which is probably be the,
that's virtually a no go unless we develop something here.
Yeah. Um, you know,
so pretty tough one at this moment
and it's moving quite quick. That's the problem.
Yeah. Buyer controls in my experience, don't really,
They back up another, another. You've gotta be
Doing everything else. Yeah.
Yep. Right. Well we've come to Yep. Um, time.
So thank you very much and
You know how to communicate with me
and I'll send this stuff.
Yeah, thank you. And,
and if you could send that, um, the ag research,
the ag research one through,
that'd be really useful. Yeah, I'll send
It to ground report On.
Okay. Thank you. Thanks Ian. Thanks.
Thanks
there.
We've got a friends from we are
gonna talk about something similar.
Good afternoon. Good
Afternoon.
Kick into it. Kick Into it.
Uh, and we're probably gonna just build on those key points.
'cause I think, um, from our perspective, like,
and that's why we've probably been quite deliberate
around calling it mad rag to
that question earlier on about the rag water map
to get it away from that perception
that it's not, it's not an issue.
Yeah. Because I think there's a perception in people's mind
it's just rag water, it's just like
everything else that's out there.
No, it's not. It's a very different we,
but as a very, very different characteristic.
Um, so hence a bit of a tip
that I suppose that comms piece around.
Um, and I suppose I'll get willing in a second
to share a little bit of our experience.
'cause unfortunately now with our only put a property there,
we are really starting to see sort of five
or seven years impact of it.
Um, and it is, it is impacting production by about 35%.
And you, you start multiplying that out over a broader area.
Um, anybody can paint the, the numbers of that.
But, um, and I think we're genuinely now that if we look,
and I think even when the documents were shared,
I think we've now genuinely picked it up on every one
of our Northland Farms now.
So the seven farms crossed broader Northland, so
that goes down as far as te Toki just out, out
to the Maori out from Ville there.
So it is getting broader
and there's, I don't whether that's an exponential growth,
but with wind, um, with machinery, you think of, um, stock
stock you think of going off to a, a show
and taking your horses in a bit of hay and things like that.
Yeah. There's just so many different vehicles around how,
sorry, I wasn't trying to touch on a raw something.
Um, but there's so many diff there's
so many different ways this can, this can move.
Um, so material from that respect
and then you think, um, we've got some good work staying,
we can talk a little bit around the impact
and the local solutions part of it.
It is then getting into that national awareness piece
as well so we can get those national views
around people are flying in
and outta Northland, well, how are we managing that?
And things like that. Um,
and we need to be able to buy ourselves the time sort of
around how do we get those national,
so those controls in place, our movement to buy us time
for a Biocontrol agents or whatever.
It's to come in. 'cause we know those are not
something that happens overnight.
Um, so really the, I suppose the ask is
around supporting the teams that are on the ground to build
that awareness as we do that broader buyer control.
Um, I don't know.
We'll, I'm hand it to you
'cause I think we've actually even in the last,
when it was November last year when we were
in front of, in the committee Yeah.
We've had further learnings from that,
from the productivity perspective.
So you wanna touch on those?
Well, yeah, I guess just probably just to go backwards,
to go forwards, just to reiterate, just with a couple
of new members, uh, you know, was misdiagnosed
for a long period of time around being gravel grounds, soil,
not madagascan rag gravel ground soil,
significantly different to gr uh,
madagascan rag water in its traits
and aggressive, uh, nature.
So I guess the, just to build on some
of the earlier comments, you know, this takes
below 42 days to germinate.
So, uh, sorry, not to germinate to seed so it can germinate,
get up and drop seed within 42 days.
So if you're on a longer round length than 42 days, yeah,
you're gonna have the impact of that seed, seed bed
and 10 to 20,000 seeds being dropped within that period.
So it's a significant risk, um,
for certain periods of the year.
And we have seen flowering almost
every single month of the year.
So, uh, it's not isolated to specific times
of the year in the right conditions.
It can get up in boogie, which is the challenge.
Um, I think just given the climate modeling
and the DNA, uh, data that they've now done, you know,
it has got a bigger area risk around not only Northland,
but some parts of Canterbury.
So while it's isolated to Northland at the moment, I guess,
what are the considerations we're putting in place
to, to limit that spread?
Um, we continue to learn, uh, impacts to the business.
So last time we were here, we sort of suggested that,
you know, we went to a cattle system and the EBS systems
and it, it was prolific there
because of the selective grazing within our cattle.
The reality is we've tried
to put sheep back into those systems
to put a different grazing pressure on the pasture
that hasn't solved the problem.
Uh, it has, uh, intermittently,
but the reality is now we're starting
to get toxicity issues in our sheep, uh,
which is impacting empty rates and also our scanning rates.
Yes. Um, so we are seeing knock on effects from, uh,
this in terms of other stock classes,
which is not an easy solution.
Uh, so yeah, back to the, the, the issues, you know,
dropping 35% production on those systems, um, you know,
they were great early on
and then these, these unintended
consequences starting to hurt us.
Um, just wanna re re reiterate the palatability,
if you do go through and mow, um,
it does become more palatable
and we have had incidences
of animals unfortunately dying through that.
Um, in the liver, uh, biopsies have have proven that.
So what are we proposing to do about it or what's happening?
Um, I guess one, one other thing just
before we go onto that is probably the significant risk
around hay exiting that region.
Yeah. If you think about the horse environment, um,
you know, going onto horse farms, you know,
or adjustment blocks, uh, you know, the unaware of
or, uh, just on the disa awareness,
whatever you wanna call it around, um, what
that weed actually is can be a massive risk
to push south out of the north.
Um, and then that will be a natural vector
to, to extend that.
So we have got a, a, a response that we've started.
Um, there's a memorandum of understanding
that we were hoping to have signed by today, uh,
with Northern Regional Council, beef and lamb dairy and z
and ourselves all contributing 12
and a half thousand dollars to a, a feasibility, uh,
with an agency to actually bring forward some, um, uh,
different avenues to, to approach this of which by,
by controls will be a consideration.
Again, that'll be a 20 year process.
So we have to start looking forward to what
that would look like and, and consider the cost to do so.
Thanks. Will, uh, Suze, you got a question?
Um, so further to Jeff's comments about it transferring from
one region to the other or have, have you experienced,
because I know you transfer stock between,
and he talked about it going in the hooves.
Have you had experienced any transfer from one farm
to another when you've moved stock or moved anything?
Not, not that you can put your hand on half
and say we,
so we've probably become really conscious in the last period
of time around we don't take a lot of stock out of north
and that down to the w well, most
of our stock are going that way.
So that's from a risk perspective.
But, um, we were like,
many wouldn't have been aware 3, 4, 5 years ago
that this is what it was.
Um, hence then when you, we started out the conversation
with our teams up there,
you had a few teams saying, oh, it's not, not seen on my farm.
Not seen on my farm. But now we're pretty convinced it's
been, they've now pulled it on every one of those farms.
So, um, yeah, there's likelihood that our stock movements
between our farms in the past may have may.
Of course that before we were well aware of what it is.
We are now being pretty conscious around what does move
and how you, how you're controlling.
Yeah. Oh, sorry. Um, oh, now I've forgotten my walls.
Oh no, sorry, sorry. It's kind of a up.
But, uh, with, as far as Australia's concerned, like,
or other countries that have had it for longer,
I can't believe that they haven't been
treating it or haven't been aware.
Like there must be some
Research or something that someone's
Done. Yeah. Uh,
look, I,
I dunno detail into the Australian response.
Um, all I know is that it's very similar to South Africa.
They are are working on biological controls.
The reality is again, uh, they're fit
for purpose within our local flora
and fauna needs to be stress tested
and I don't even think they've got a solution. So
We need to do the research ourselves.
We do, yes. Okay. Thank you. Uh,
Kind of up Too. Oh
joke, Mike
Over you. You go
First. Oh damn Mike.
Um, so just on that, in terms of bio control
that they're looking at over in other
jurisdictions, what about chemicals?
Uh, un unsure of the chemicals.
All I know are the chemicals that we've
accessed today, so I can't
Comment that so far. And
Unfortunately it's a virtuous cycle that doesn't end well.
No, no, but, And
It, and it, and it actually doesn't work
that well if I'm honest, Mike.
The efficacy is not that great,
especially on more mature plants. They become wood
With the current Chemicals.
With the current chemicals.
Yeah. All meat, SFU and toron.
There's not a lot of future in using that.
No. For too long.
And and the reality is they go hard, they go Woody,
the vegetation falls off if you don't get them fully,
it's almost like co it starts sprouting back again.
Like it's a brutal, it's a brutal weed.
We, Joe, Thank you.
Um, I, I do have a question with regard to the um, uh,
moving it into different parts of the country, but
before I go onto that, I just wanted to, it'd be remiss
of me not to say Mark,
that I was at a farm on the east coast, uh, last week
and the staff there were, um, talking about
how grateful they were with the way that you responded
to the teams there and the support that you gave
around the time of the siteline.
So I thought it would be remiss of me not to mention
that and acknowledge you for
That more. You gonna
Say you saw it, you saw up.
Thank you Joe. Appreciate.
I just, I just wanna be clear
that I'm understanding what's being said
and it comes back to something that you said Jeff about um,
well when I asked the question around if it's,
there's this concern around it spreading from one region
to another through feed
and there not being something in place to say, right,
no feed from this place can leave this region.
Is that not able to happen until you've got it?
Uh, Jeff as part of like a notify piece.
So is there no extraordinary powers then that
NPI can do in this
Bring it NPI can NI can do anything they,
like they would notice of motion
or something, a notice of direction or something.
You're not Yeah, that's what I was thinking.
So it is possible if that's what they chose to, they,
you don't have to wait till that point.
That was my question. So they,
They've come back to us and say you go
and figure it out and then come back to us.
Okay. Interesting Mike,
because yeah, I was just gonna, um, what Joe said,
I think it's probably gotta be machinery as well.
Yes. Because I've seen that
multiple times. That's fair point.
Yeah. That half bale of hay in the Yeah,
Yeah. Yeah.
And if it's as destructive as, you know, as
what you guys are seeing, we sure
as heck don't want it in other regions
because once that horse is gone it's a
bit like shutting the door, isn't it? Yeah, exactly.
And it's the broader machinery conversation.
He's a little bit of point around diggers,
forestry equipment and things like that.
Yeah. We are to that point earlier on,
we are seeing it in those forestry
areas and things like that now.
And it's actually connecting with that broader community
of people that, that sort of machine,
it's not just the al it's that broad spectrum
of machinery that might be moving. So
Yeah. And I
yeah, it'll be a will be moving not a might. Yeah.
Yeah. Steve
E every description that we've heard
of this particular thing makes it sound like the
worst we've ever had.
Just about just sounds horrific.
Um, and I just wonder at what point we need
to consider a more critical response
because to your point, Mike,
it's a stitch in time situation.
If we can stop a screen to other regions,
if you're talking about a 35% reduction productivity
reduction, it's a massive consequence.
Mm-hmm. So what, what is the pathway
for us pushing a bit more of an emergency button on
stopping it spreading because um, you know Yeah.
It's all very well to be looking
for some biological solution, meanwhile it's spreading.
Yeah. And meanwhile it's gonna get to other regions and,
And I think that was probably my point earlier on in terms
of the, the buyer control is the long term
Solution. Yeah. We need to stop,
we
Need, we need to, we need the controls in place
to stop movement as much as we can in the interim
because that is, that is the long term solution. Absolutely
Wonder what we can do to expedite that.
Yeah. If we agree that it's at that level of, that the mag,
that magnitude of a problem.
Mm-hmm. Yep. It's the biggest street
apart from farming Mm.
That we watch. Yeah. Okay. It's massive something
Mouth, if it's 35% Yeah, that's right.
35% of 10 export.
Uh, uh, I guess
The grant would like to ask question,
does the committee have any problems?
No. Actually information is asked question.
I'll Put up this all the time anyway.
Serious is one of the guys from far North Farms around Tai,
he's been dairy farming there for many, many generations
and he's been dealing with this for a long time.
And uh, to your point of already having spread,
he was visiting Gisborne and found it down there
and he said, I know what it is, it was that.
Oh really? So it was, it is already.
I mean that won't surprise you guys, I suspect.
But that's what he said to me.
He was absolutely adamant,
I know I can spot the stuff from meters.
'cause he goes around his farm pulling it all out. Yeah.
And it was, that's what it was. Sure. So I'm just let know
Because by the sounds really the only way
to do it is physically remove either pull,
grab it out or pull it out. So
Can you grab it? But
in the early stages, not like it gets
In early stages and Yeah, it'll
And does It pull out so like it's not like
a thistle, you don't have to grab it. You can pull it,
You can pull it, yeah. Oh yeah.
Yeah. To destroy it afterwards.
How do you destroy? You burn it.
Yeah. So we, we remove it out of the paddock.
You know, it's very similar to the old rag war process.
You know, you basically take it out
and put it on the middle of the track or burn it, you know.
And are the seed still viable when
it's when you've pulled it up?
Well it depends that age part of it,
if you're pulling it when it's young
and juvenile, you got, you're getting it whatever, 10,
14 days before it's got closer to that 40.
Yeah. If you're getting up to that 40 plus days,
you're probably getting to a point where it's got seeds.
Mike, um, do you have, I asked um, Jeff and em before,
but do you have any idea of the actual germination rate?
Yeah. You've got 10,000 Cs.
How many of those are actually viable? Any idea on that 10?
You'll have to look at that agri paper,
but that I think it does last in the soil
for a significant amount of time as well.
So while you might get, not get an immediate response. Yeah.
Over time you might get a higher strike rate
and that's where, you know, you go and try
and spray out your paddock, do the right things with,
you know, potentially cultivation.
It's just gonna spread it even further
Exhaust, isn't it? Just
keep, keep coming back. Keep coming back.
So does um, cultivation help slow down the,
like some of the marking gardens
and stuff where they're continually cultivating?
Does that break the cycle?
Can't answer that. I think if you spray
No it doesn't. We've done
maze cross. Yes.
And um, for the whole MAs program,
as you put a thought post emergence Yes.
Emergence and thought s**t,
we've got a clean site drill in the grass, bang back.
Alright. Yeah. Okay.
And so it's like, do I leave this paddock fellow
for two years and just treat it with chemical?
Just try and ate the weeds.
Maybe just run the river through it again for two years
and try and get all that a thousand seeds up before I do it.
You know, not really you.
Yeah, yeah. It's an expensive,
whichever way you look at it. None of the
Pre-emergent or post-em emergent maize sprays that
Had any effect? No.
What about burning off?
Well you'll germinate a lot of seed at that time.
Oh, okay. But if you, okay, but
Not to say every seed will germinate too.
Yeah. You don't need that many
to germinate for it a problem.
Any other questions?
I just say there's some, um,
information about the Australia best practice
and um, links to Weed Australia, um, on the back
of that presentation.
So if you, they call it fire we,
I guess, um, the one thing that you'd want us
to take away from this is what
do you think should happen? Mm-hmm.
Probably the, the key one is probably goes
back to that question earlier on.
How do we support that, the local
and that to get those controls in place, um,
to stop that movement.
What can we all do collectively, um,
to wanna raise awareness two without stopping the country,
but how do we too then get that right balance around
where the at risk and how you, how you manage that movement.
But it is it also that you need that level of, um,
PR similar to things like that. So
People, crystal grass, all those, it's
Using all those mechanisms and like we along
with NPI will be at the um, regional field days in February
and it's how do you, that'll be part of that,
but how do we get all the others engaged
as field days on those 20, 30,000 people go
through the national, uh, regional field days there.
So using that as a vehicle,
but just using all those vehicles.
Um, and you now got me worried about the GSON one around
how you then start raising that more
broader awareness to get something.
So I think that's the key response is how can we get
that a more broader support to get some real rapid action
And Yeah.
One of the reasons I started the petition was
because Northern Regional Council were given the
responsibility of handling all this by MPI.
And I think the discussions now we realize that
that's probably too much.
But North Regional Council, you know, they're good people
but they're, they're overstretched,
haven't got the finances.
So I think one thing I'd like to see out of that is,
is giving either giving support or,
or NPI looking
government response.
Yeah. This is a threat.
Well the government, um, classifies it like they do some
of the other, um, incursions then that allows the council
to operate as well.
Mm-hmm. Um, like they've had a, a canned notice.
Yeah. And Steve Grant's point,
like it seems obvious that we want to do some sort
of assessment of what other regions that had got to.
Yeah. Well if there's no, if there's very little recognition
outside Northland it looks like, I dunno.
Yeah. Correct. Yeah.
He, to build the awareness, you
Build the awareness then build
to spot it. Yeah. Then you realize,
Well yeah, it was, it was mislabeled
with Northern Regional Council up until very, very recently.
That's right. So they had to DNA test
it to understand what it
Was. Wow. Yeah.
Yeah. Oh, well thank you very much for your time.
That's right. Happy.
You guys are not well Grant is going to too.
Grant's volunteering to do some weed pulling every weekend.
Oh yeah. He's available Friday
through the Monday. Okay. Thanks
Very much. Thank you.
Appreciate it. Thank you. Thanks Jim. Thanks Ian.
Are we offline? Um, I think you need to.